Perspectives on the CAP Theorem
Seth Gilbert
National University of Singapore
Nancy A. Lynch
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Abstract
Almost twelve years ago, in 2000, Eric Brewer introduced the idea that there is a fundamental trade-off between
consistency, availability, and partition tolerance. This trade-off, which has become known as the CAP Theorem, has
been widely discussed ever since. In this paper, we review the CAP Theorem and situate it within the broader context
of distributed computing theory. We then discuss the practical implications of the CAP Theorem, and explore some
general techniques for coping with the inherent trade-offs that it implies.
1 Introduction
Almost twelve years ago, in 2000, Eric Brewer introduced the idea that there is a fundamental trade-off between
consistency, availability, and partition tolerance. This trade-off, which has become known as the CAP Theorem, has
been widely discussed ever since.
Theoretical context. Our first goal in this paper is to situate the CAP Theorem in the broader context of distributed
computing theory. Some of the interest in the CAP Theorem, perhaps, derives from the fact that it illustrates a more
general trade-off that appears everywhere (e.g., [4,7,15,17,23]) in the study of distributed computing: the impossibility
of guaranteeing both safety and liveness in an unreliable distributed system:
Safety: Informally, an algorithm is safe if nothing bad ever happens. A quiet, uneventful room is perfectly safe.
Consistency (as defined in the CAP Theorem) is a classic safety property: every response sent to a client is correct.
Liveness: By contrast, an algorithm is live if eventually something good happens. In a busy pub, there may be some
good things happening, and there may be some bad things happening—but overall, it is quite lively. Availability is a
classic liveness property: eventually, every request receives a response.
Unreliable: There are many different ways in which a system can be unreliable. There may be partitions, as is discussed
in the CAP Theorem. Alternatively, there may be crash failures, message loss, malicious attacks (or Byzantine
failures), etc.
The CAP Theorem, in this light, is simply one example of the fundamental fact that you cannot achieve both safety
and liveness in an unreliable distributed system.
